.\" Aileron man page
.\" Generated for v0.16.0
.TH AILERON "1" "April 2026" "aileron 0.16.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
aileron \- keyboard-driven tiling web environment for developers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B aileron
.RB [ \-d \fIconfig_dir\fR ] [ \-e \fIengine\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Aileron is a keyboard-driven tiling web browser built with Rust. It renders
web content in tiled panes within a single window, inspired by terminal
multiplexers and tiling window managers.
.PP
Features include:
.RS 4
.IP \(bu 2
BSP-tree tiling layout with horizontal/vertical splits
.IP \(bu 2
Vim-style modal editing (Normal, Insert, Command, Hint modes)
.IP \(bu 2
Command palette (Ctrl+P) with fuzzy search
.IP \(bu 2
Integrated terminal emulator
.IP \(bu 2
Bookmark management with folders
.IP \(bu 2
Content scripts and Lua extensions
.IP \(bu 2
MCP (Model Context Protocol) server for AI integration
.IP \(bu 2
Ad blocking with EasyList-compatible filters
.IP \(bu 2
Per-site settings (zoom, JavaScript, cookies, ad blocking)
.IP \(bu 2
Download manager with progress tracking
.IP \(bu 2
WebExtensions API, Bitwarden password integration
.RE
.SH MODES
.B Normal mode (default):
Navigation, pane management, and command input.
Key bindings: h/j/k/l (scroll), gt/gT (tabs), d (close), vs/sp (split).
.PP
.B Insert mode (gi):
Pass keyboard input to web content.
Press Escape to return to Normal mode.
.PP
.B Command mode (:):
Type commands at the bottom of the screen.
Press Enter to execute, Escape to cancel.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BR :open <url>
Navigate to URL.
.TP
.BR :q , :quit
Quit Aileron.
.TP
.BR :vs , :sp
Split vertically / horizontally.
.TP
.BR :gt , :gT
Next / previous tab.
.TP
.BR :gi
Enter insert mode.
.TP
.BR :bookmarks
Open bookmarks panel.
.TP
.BR :bookmark <url> [folder]
Bookmark current page.
.TP
.BR :history
Browse history.
.TP
.BR :downloads
List active downloads.
.TP
.BR :g <url>
Open URL in a new tab (horizontal split).
.TP
.BR :find <query>
Find in page.
.TP
.BR :set <key> <value>
Set a configuration option.
.TP
.BR :site-settings
Open per-site settings panel.
.TP
.BR :stats
Show input latency statistics.
.TP
.BR :console
Show JavaScript console log.
.TP
.BR :inspect
Toggle WebKit developer tools.
.TP
.BR :mute , :unmute
Toggle audio mute on current pane.
.TP
.BR :crash-reload
Reload pane after a crash.
.TP
.BR :ws-save <name> , :ws-load <name>
Save / load workspace.
.TP
.BR :ws-next , :ws-prev
Cycle through workspaces.
.TP
.BR :tab-restore
Reopen last closed tab.
.TP
.BR :tab-move <direction>
Move tab (up, down, left, right).
.TP
.BR :zoom-in , :zoom-out
Adjust page zoom level.
.TP
.BR :theme <name>
Switch color theme.
.TP
.BR :extension-load <path>
Load a WebExtensions extension.
.TP
.BR :lua <code>
Execute Lua code.
.SH KEY BINDINGS
Normal mode defaults:
.TP
.BR h / j / k / l
Scroll left / down / up / right.
.TP
.BR gt / gT
Next / previous tab.
.TP
.BR d
Close current pane.
.TP
.BR D
Close current pane, focus left.
.TP
.BR vs
Split vertically.
.TP
.BR sp
Split horizontally.
.TP
.BR H / J / K / L
Resize split (increase left/down/up/right).
.TP
.BR r
Rotate split direction.
.TP
.BR gi
Enter insert mode.
.TP
.BR :
Enter command mode.
.TP
.BR Ctrl+p
Open command palette.
.TP
.BR Ctrl+h
Toggle bookmarks panel.
.TP
.BR f
Open link hints.
.TP
.BR y
Copy current URL to clipboard.
.TP
.BR p
Paste from clipboard.
.TP
.BR u
Reopen last closed tab.
.TP
.BR /
Search in page.
.TP
.BR n / N
Next / previous search match.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-d \fIconfig_dir\fR
Use custom configuration directory (default: ~/.config/aileron/).
.TP
.BR \-e \fIengine\fR
Select rendering engine: webkit (default) or servo (experimental).
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR ~/.config/aileron/config.toml
User configuration file.
.TP
.IR ~/.config/aileron/keybindings.toml
Custom keybindings (overrides defaults).
.TP
.IR ~/.config/aileron/aileron.db
SQLite database (history, bookmarks, sessions, site settings).
.TP
.IR ~/.config/aileron/workspaces/
Saved workspace files.
.TP
.IR ~/.local/share/aileron/
Downloads directory.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is stored in TOML format. Key options:
.TP
.BR homepage
Default new-tab URL.
.TP
.BR search_engine
Default search engine URL template (%s placeholder).
.TP
.BR tab_layout
Tab bar layout: top, bottom, left, right.
.TP
.BR popup_blocker_enabled
Block window.open() popups (default: true).
.TP
.BR https_upgrade_enabled
Upgrade HTTP to HTTPS (default: true).
.TP
.BR tracking_protection_enabled
Enable tracking protection (default: true).
.TP
.BR restore_session
Restore tabs on startup (default: true).
.TP
.BR adaptive_quality
Reduce frame rate for background tabs (default: true).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR aileron(5)
for configuration file format details.
.SH AUTHOR
Wyatt Au <wyatt@patch.com>
